00m 04s:
	Welcome to take note on wpsu. I'm sure and Stanford as campus Pastor for the Third Way Collective Ben Weidman helps Penn State students grapple with big questions that lie at the intersection of Faith peace and social justice. He works to share his Mennonite Faith while creating an inclusive community with students from a variety of religions and beliefs. He studied at Eastern Mennonite University and got his graduate degree from Fuller Theological Seminary where he realized his passion for campus ministry then thank you so much for joining us. Can you just explain what Third Way Collective is collected was started about five years ago. Local Peace church is primarily University Mennonite church at noticed that students on Penn State's campus often felt like they had to choose between their faith identity and the Justice causes that they cared most deeply about was almost like they're facing a Crossroads and fortunately the minimum
01m 04s:
	Church here in town has this Rich tradition of compelling their faith to stand up for peace and Justice causes and we thought we could extrapolate from that and bring that to campus and offer students a literal third way to save as people of Faith you can stand up for the causes that you believe in and our Hope was that from the beginning we would encourage Penn State's Faith Community to take a stronger stand for justice causes that our campus and Community we're going through but also to remind the Justice Community the advocacy people that are out there that people of Faith also belong at the table and also need to be there providing their wisdom and insight into perspective and what kind of activities does third like electives do in participate in we started out assuming that we were the ones with all the answers and so our schedule early on was heavily leaning towards sort of info sessions trainings speakers focusing on stuff that we thought the students need to know.
02m 04s:
	I'm very quickly realize that students didn't really need one more lecture in their lives and we had simultaneously been doing home cooked meals and dinners and other kinds of spaces around our community and we found that students incentive casual conversation that was unstructured ended up getting to the social justice and peace topics that we were really curious about and they didn't necessarily needs the structure that we were providing them. And so what we've ended up leaning in as our identity has unfolded over the last few years is table conversations primarily providing students with a space to belong to have the conversations about the tough stuff that's happening in their lives and to guide those conversations reminding ourselves that we are all Spiritual Beings and regardless of what faith tradition we come from. We hope that there's some kind of truth that you can go in there to help apply to the the most important things that we're all facing in our world today.
03m 04s:
	Can you explain the significance of the name of the group? What does Third Way mean, especially in the context of the Mennonite tradition from which the organization started we were trying to find a name that would be welcoming and inclusive two people from any tradition and Mennonites just happened to see themselves as neither Protestant or Catholic but a third way and we liked that that also resonated with are polarizing community in context and culture. We thought offering a third way in a divided World provided a sense of hope that perhaps instead of shouting at each other across the aisle or across our differences. We could offer a pathway that would that would be a third way a literal third way to two people and so that's where the name comes from. The second part Collective was because we talked to a lot of other campus organizations who mentioned that they were struggling to get students to commit to One Singular group.
04m 04s:
	And we like the idea of building a broad-reaching collective of connected students and community members rather than a small insular group of students and some of the talks you've done talking about another idea of the Third Way of you know, people feeling like violence is one answer for example and not doing anything is another solution in that there could be a third way and that struck me is sometimes it's probably pretty hard to think of what that Third Way could be you help people think about what that could look like. Absolutely. I think it's a myth that are only two options are fight-or-flight and I think often the best solutions to problems are when we start to think Beyond those two paths, I think about moments on our campus. We had some kind of angry Street Preachers show up a couple of years ago. It seems
05m 04s:
	Like they were against everything, you know, they had a banner that that shouted basically all of the things that they thought were evil about a college student experience and their presence really started to spark a lot of anger there in front of the LGBT Student Center and students came out really wanting to argue loudly and passionately for the causes that they believed in and if you are still Mobsters realize that all this was doing was creating a kind of violent feeling situation. And so we started wandering through the crowd passing out stickers that had the tri-colored welcome your neighbor refrain on it and very quickly realized the other conversations were happening that were distracting from the violence of the person who had a showing up on our campus and after a very short while things are kind of calm down to the point where people begin to drift away. We realized in that moment that we were not promoting passivity. We weren't encouraging the crowd to like
06m 04s:
	Just walk away and do nothing. We also weren't encouraging the crowd to like bring their righteous anger in a violent method. We were kind of proposing an alternative to that in those moments where we see. So the crystallization of the Third Way, I are really beautiful and magical when they take place and I think they are often harder paths to follow and they're not ones that we feel intuitively I'm stand so they take more creativity and and a more of a listening presents to to be trying to sense of what a better path might look like
06m 38s:
	How do you find a balance between staying true to your Mennonite Faith which is such an important part of your life. But then also I know it's very important to you to be inclusive to others and until others who may not even have a faith background. How do you balance that for me? I think a lot of it is about the the pathway that my wife is taken like a lot of kids. I was bullied during middle school and my Mennonite Community with the one place where I felt I could fully be myself and fully belong there. And so when I think about that, that's often when I think about the church as it's best, you know, providing that safe haven for people who feel like they've been alienated and so I think that propels me into all kinds of different spaces. It's why I stand next to LGBT students who feel like they don't have a place because they don't fit a social Norm why I try and stand up for students from other faiths traditions and be a more inclusive and welcoming play.
07m 38s:
	I know in a community that often only privileges those with a Christian tradition. That's why I try and and speak up for students with other skin colors because we come from a we have a predominantly white looking student body and often are students who are under-represented don't feel as much as at home as their white counterparts do so. It's really reminding myself of those early stories that shaped me and trying to be that for other people.
08m 10s:
	What do you wish people knew or understood about what it means at least for you to be Mennonite to come from that tradition? I think part of a challenge with nomination or tradition. Like the Mennonite tradition is that there's a lot of diversity in it a lot of theological diversity and most people when they think about the word Mennonite immediately jump to Amish light right like that people wearing plain clothes driving horse and Buggies and they don't expect it necessarily to be a progressive theology. That might be standing up for LGBT inclusion are Christian Care of the environment those sorts of things. And so I think that's the biggest challenge is trying to present an alternative to the traditional views that people have that's what I meant and I can be but it's got a very rich tradition of especially standing up against violence. And I think that's probably the strongest pillar that I have to stand on for my tradition.
09m 10s:
	And so we can try and create peace in the whole multitude of different ways. I think that I'm being true to to my roots even if the more conservative folks in my tradition might not see it that way. That's how I've interpreted it and that's what I hope people experience when they come into contact with a person like me or someone with my kind of theology.
09m 31s:
	 You've written about the importance of showing up in spaces where ministers are rarely seen. Can you give an example of what a space like that might be?
09m 42s:
	 Yeah, I think especially when it comes to to Justice movements to advocacy spaces people don't expect people of Faith to be there. And so when I come to protest or when I come to a March or Community for him introduce myself as a reverend, I think that is has the power to be transformative to remind those around me that people face should be showing up in these kinds of spaces and speaking up especially for those who feel marginalized perhaps the most crystallized memory I have in my head is shortly after the last presidential election season students organized a rally speaking their displeasure at the current Administration is primarily organized by students of color and students from the LGBT community. And when we arrived as a group there was again A Street Preacher on hands basically telling everyone
10m 42s:
	 They were going to hell because they did not affirm the current president and I went up and had a conversation with that person and tried to present another perspective that these were students were hurting because the way that they were feeling marginalized by the words spoken by the politics of that moment and student photographer snapped a picture of the two of us kind of engage in each other this sort of angry Street preacher in the other person myself afterwards that she approached me and said, can I get your name for this image? It's going to be used in the Collegian or something like that. And I said I am Reverend Ben Weidman and she is like a triple take in her mind. She was looking at a sort of religious radical engaging a secular person with no face who is more sane in her mind. She did not imagine that it was two people of Faith wrestling with their face and how to engage the world at this moment, and I think that
11m 42s:
	 Helpful, that's helpful in and remaining students that there are people who believe in what they believe in who also come from Faith Traditions who are willing to take risks perhaps to show up and spaces that people have faith often have done damage in the try and be an alternative to that into to try and offer some hope in the midst of really difficult spaces.
12m 06s:
	 Play one of those pieces that I was maybe at first surprised to see that you are so seated with was the Penn State's clothing Transit where transgender and gender-nonconforming students can select clothing free of charge without you know, maybe the discomfort of being in a store that is separated by gender. Why did you choose to be involved in that?
12m 31s:
	 I chose to be involved in that because of one single human being very quickly after I arrived on campus. I started meeting students from the LGBT community who also identified as Christian and they shared with me that for them in a lot of different spaces. They felt like they had to choose among their identities. So in the LGBT Student Center, they often felt like they had to hide their faith identity and then the spiritual center they felt like they had to hide their LGBT identity. And so after some conversation, I helped them begin an organization called receiving with Thanksgiving which was Penn State's first LGBT Christian Network and tragically one of those students passed away trans student by the name of Eli Rowe and in a way of sort of remembering Elie a funeral was held on campus and he lies parents came to
13m 31s:
	 Inside, you know Eli had been rejected from his faith community a local church. No longer wanted to acknowledge him as a child of their own because of that entity that video I had and they said you were his Pastor you were there when the church rejected him. We want you to officiate at the funeral. So that was deeply moving. We organized a speaker series in Eli's memory and as we were doing that students began saying there's got to be a way to sort of walk with the Trans community in a more personal way not just to walk alongside them but to actually offer them something of value and so we did a transgender clothing exchange several months after his passing kind of in his honor and we got a bunch of people in the community to donate clothes that they no longer used and we said anyone from the LGBT community could come and take as much or as little clothing as they wanted.
14m 31s:
	 I'm after holding that for a few times at the LGBT Student Center reached out and asked if they would be able to take those clothes and make it a permanent part of Penn State's institution. And so the clothing Transit was born all because of really one person in trying to remember you. I remember his story into remember that he was a person who stood up for the Justice causes, but he believed in because he was a person of faith and and that Clothing Closet lives on in memory of that. I seen it that was probably one of the toughest parts of your experience. I know you lie. Sometimes known as Miriam
15m 12s:
	 How did their passing impact you and you know that your ministry?
15m 23s:
	 I think when a student passes away, it is simultaneously the hardest part of my work and the most beautiful part of my work to be able to walk with students and family members who are grieving makes me feel
15m 45s:
	 Foley affirmed in my sense of call to be a minister standing with especially with marginalized peoples or people who are grieving or hurting. I think it's a Bittersweet moment because you know, I never wish for that to happen, but I think it points to the need for people to be moving into spaces that we don't often assume people with faith end up. There's a lot of loneliness and isolation that comes with with death. And and so when we as Faith leaders can walk alongside people in those spaces, it's it's deeply moving here. Just joining us. This is take note on wpsu. I'm sharing Stanford Our Guest is Ben Weidman campus Pastor for the Third Way Collective a student organization at Penn State focused on faith. Peace and justice.
16m 38s:
	 In many ways when you choose a life of service particularly being a pastor you choose a life where you belong to others? I think you belong to community how have you learned to set boundaries or or balance that you also have a family? How does that balance play out for you? You're having a family is actually pretty helpful part because there are good for the witness test for when I'm overextending myself. They tell me and I'm appreciative of that both that the voice of my partner and also our children saying hey, we haven't seen you enough in a while. I'm very fortunate to have an advisory team that understands self-care that recently gave me a three-month sabbatical and pushes me really to be working less not more even know there's plenty of work out there to be done. And so that's how I try and find my balance. I think part of uncovering a possible Third Way is to
17m 37s:
	 care for the soul and care for the individual and so I cannot I'm doing a disservice to the students that I work with if I'm overextending myself all the time, but telling them that they need to be resting like I need to demonstrate that I also take breaks and I also rest and they should to to be a more vibrant and at full human being I just has issues that you think we're facing now as a community and as a country was conversation with student leaders and
18m 13s:
	 They mentioned a couple of things that I think we're helpful reminders for me one is cause fatigue I think because of the way we consume media right now, there's just so much that we are supposed to care about and so it is really about finding the balance finding both your passions and your Pathways that help you feel like you're making a meaningful difference and also trying to find the balance that you need to be a healthy enough to continue to work at some of these things something else. That's that's really on my radar right now is this idea that a lot of young adults feel really lonely they feel very well-connected broadly connected social media helps with that but they also feel very isolated often and especially at a campus like Penn State you can feel very lost in a sea of 46000 students. And so we really do need to be working hard to provide and whatever we we can some sense that you belong to a community.
19m 13s:
	 It's bigger than yourself that you belong to a community that has your back. If something unjust is happening to you and that you belong to a community that you can share the burden of all the things that we're supposed to be caring about right now. I think that's really at the core of what we're trying to do this Fallen to continually remind ourselves of that beyond that. There's always things that pop up. I remember my first fall in 2014 was when the Black lives matter movement really took off across this country and we hadn't planned for that. We had set that as our goal in the fall.
19m 48s:
	 But it happened and we had to adapt and be willing to move in that direction. None of us could have anticipated the very public way that I Community felt the violence of the shootings that happened last spring we had to adapt and respond to navigate those in ways that felt meaningful for our students and for the community members that connect with us as well and I'm guessing that there will be things that come this fall in the spring in our community that will transform us and will not be things that we were planning for.
20m 20s:
	 Tell me about the bicycle ride that from State College to Washington DC that you participated in what was that for? And and why did you choose to participate good friend with my professor? Dr. Jonathan Brock up several years ago in a way to raise awareness for Pennsylvania Interfaith Power & Light a wonderful organization that tackle climate change. He rode his bike with a couple of friends from State College to Washington DC to both Ray support for the work of Pennsylvania Interfaith Power & Light, but also to Advocate on Capitol Hill to to tell our elected officials that people face care about climate change and want their politicians to do something about that. And so for the last several years that bike ride has happened every spring just after the semester is done and that for the last three or four years. I've gone Along on my own bike stopping in small towns along the way sharing our stories about why we have people face care about
21m 21s:
	 Listening to that people who are hosting us talking about the way the climate changes affecting their lives and entering those stories with us when we get to DC we get to talk to her elected officials from all across Pennsylvania and talk about why this is a moral issue. Why climate change is affecting all of us and why they need to do something about it.
21m 42s:
	 So climate change lgbtq issues a black lives matter standing up for marginalized communities. This is not easy work. What do you do when you get discouraged or frustrated?
22m 02s:
	 I think about the small stories. I think about a student who stood up at last year's coming out rally and said that without Third Way collective in a few other organizations in their life. They probably wouldn't be here because they probably would have taken their own life. I think about students who I meet who have gone through something that is shaking their face. It is made them jaded with the tradition they grew up in and I'm looking for one final episode of something to redeem that their faith tradition before they give it up completely when they find out about Third Way Collective and it stands up for the things that they think are important that their faith tradition for some reason has forgotten about
22m 47s:
	 That's salvation for them that provides them with a space to redeem what they thought they were about to lose and I think that's what keeps me going. And that's what provides my work with a lot of its value.
23m 00s:
	 So, you know from your background and I've heard you talk about the word. Peace a lot.
23m 08s:
	 Can we have peace in America's Got Something you believe is possible and our country in our world. And if so what it would is it going to take?
23m 19s:
	 That is not a simple question. I think piece needs to start at a local level. I think peace starts with each of us and peace starts in small ways in our local contacts and my hope is that the work that we are doing the work that our colleagues on campus and in the community are doing to stand up for all these different justice issues that that has a ripple effect in central Pennsylvania that people look to us to say hate. There's something special happening there and perhaps we can bring that to our community to what do you want the lasting impact of the Third Way Collective and also your work to be
23m 59s:
	 I think that we're already seeing some of those changes because of their way collective in receiving with Thanksgiving a ripple effect has been created where there are no spaces for LGBT students to be both people of faith and fully Embrace their actual gender identity as well that's happening. In other ways has as well on a campus. There's more collaboration between Justice minded groups and organizations. There's more of a crossover between a campus in our community and that momentum is moving in the right direction and if I don't want to take ownership for all of it, but I think that a congregation who had a very simple vision for student organization that stood up for peace Justice and faith has led to a lot of these major changes. There are now a couple of other spiritual groups that have hired people to focus on social justice stuff around their feet tradition, and I don't think that would have happened.
24m 58s:
	 5/3 way Collective launched, I think even the pasquerilla spiritual center, which is officially titled the Center for Spiritual and ethical development is leaning in more now to the ethical side of that equation and not just saying we're home for spiritual groups, but we stand up for the ethical causes that our students are in need of engaging and I think that's a lasting Legacy. Even if this organization shuts down tomorrow. I think there's enough momentum in some of the things that we have started that have been institutionally affirmed that I I'm excited about that and it gives me a lot of Hope for what is possible now that you're older anything, but what do you think you've learned from working in community and spaces the people who are younger than you and also at just a very different stage in their lives very pivotal part of their lives.
25m 59s:
	 Especially around that black lives matter movement in my very first fall here. I approached it feeling some anxiety that like, what do I have to offer and I remember walking into an early planning meeting in approaching a student and saying is it? Okay if I'm here like can actually be a part of this and it's absolutely I thought. Oh no now I have to say what do you what do you want from me? And I'm not going to have anything that they actually need and the student said all we need from you is to stand beside us all we need from you. Is you to be a presence here as we leave this movement and I think that's something that we often forget. I think those of us who might be a little older off and think we need to be the ones pushing the movement and we forget that sometimes all we need to do is just walk alongside people to empower them to do the work receiving with Thanksgiving was a wonderful organization, but it was led by its students who had a heart.
26m 59s:
	 I kind of work their way Collective is a great organization, but nothing really happens unless the students get behind it as well. Same thing for a lot of the other Justice causes in our community. I think the older adults can help Empower we do have resources and we do have connections that can help students take those first steps, but I think it's a misguided thought to think that we are the ones with the answers bringing it to the student body.
27m 29s:
	 Ben thank you so much for coming and talking with us today. You're welcome. Thank you so much for having me. This has been a lot of fun as campus Pastor for Third Way Collective. Then Weidman helps Penn State students grapple with big questions that live the intersection of Faith. Peace and Justice. He works to share his Mennonite Faith while creating an inclusive community with students from various religions and beliefs. He studied at Eastern Mennonite University and got his graduate degree from Fuller Theological Seminary where he realized his passion for campus ministry here more take note interviews on our website at wpsu.org / take note. I'm sure and Stanford wpsu.
